<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="section-1" id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal">28</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Same to the Same</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">15a, Whittington Terrace, Bayswater<br/>
				<time datetime="1929-02-01">1st February, 1929</time></p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Bungie, my darling,</p>
			</header>
			<p>What, in God‚Äôs name, are you going to do with me if I get jealous and suspicious? Or I with you, if it happens that way? I ask this in damn sober earnest, old girl. I‚Äôve got the thing right under my eyes here, and I know perfectly well that no agreement and no promise made before marriage will stand up for a single moment if either of us gets that ugly bug into the blood.</p>
			<p>You remember‚ÅÝ‚Äîmonths ago‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI passed on a cheerful little matrimonial dialogue that took place by the umbrella-stand. To-night we had the pleasure of hearing the thing carried on to the next stage.</p>
			<p>Harrison had the brilliant idea of inviting Lathom and me to dinner to taste his special way of frying chicken. Well, there we all were‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMiss Milsom frightfully kittenish in a garment she had embroidered herself with Persian arabesques. (‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know <em>what</em> they mean, you know, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMunting. Probably something frightfully improper! I copied them off a rug.‚Äù) Harrison who allows nobody to penetrate into ‚Äúhis‚Äù kitchen when he‚Äôs working out a masterpiece, was frying away amid a powerful odour of garlic. No <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison! We furiously make conversation‚ÅÝ‚Äîenter <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">H.</abbr>‚ÅÝ‚Äîgives a black look round, and disappears again. I count the things on the mantelpiece‚ÅÝ‚Äîtwo brass candlesticks, brass door-knocker representing the Lincoln imp‚ÅÝ‚Äîtwo imitation brass mulling-cones‚ÅÝ‚Äîill-balanced pottery nude‚ÅÝ‚Äîquaint clock and pair of Liberty nondescripts. Front door goes. Kitchen door in the distance heard to burst open. ‚ÄúWell, where have <em>you</em> been?‚Äù Awful realisation creeps over us all that the sitting-room door has been left open. I say hurriedly: ‚ÄúHave you read the new Michael Arlen, Miss Milsom?‚Äù We are all aware that a prolonged cross-examination is proceeding. Lathom fidgets. Voice rises to appalling distinctness: ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt talk nonsense! How <em>long</em> were you at the hairdresser‚Äôs?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWell, what <em>were</em> you doing?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîYes, but <em>what</em> kept you?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîYes, of course, you met somebody. You seem to be meeting a lot of people lately!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt care who it ‚Äòonly‚Äô was‚ÅÝ‚Äîone of the men from the office, I suppose‚ÅÝ‚ÄîCarrie Mortimer? nonsense!‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI shall <em>not</em> be quiet‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI shall talk as loudly as I like‚ÅÝ‚ÄîDid you or did you not remember‚ÅÝ‚Äî?‚Äù Here I grow desperate and turn on the gramophone. In comes Harrison, putting a good face on it. ‚ÄúHere‚Äôs the wife, late as usual!‚Äù We sit down to dinner in embarrassed silence. I murmur eulogies on the chicken. ‚ÄúOver-cooked,‚Äù says Harrison, shovelling it all aside and savagely picking at the vegetables. After this, everybody is afraid to eat it, for fear of not seeming to know good food from bad. ‚ÄúIt seems delicious to me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison,‚Äù says Miss Milsom, profiting nothing from long experience. ‚ÄúOh,‚Äù says Harrison, sourly, ‚Äúyou women don‚Äôt care what you eat. It‚Äôs overdone, isn‚Äôt it, Lathom?‚Äù Lathom, quite helpless with rage, says in a strangulated voice, that he thinks it‚Äôs just right. ‚ÄúWell, you‚Äôre not eating it,‚Äù says Harrison, gloomily triumphant. By this time everybody‚Äôs appetite is taken thoroughly away. There is nothing on earth the matter with the chicken, but we all sit staring at it as though it was a Harpagus-feast of boiled baby.</p>
			<p>Well, I‚Äôll spare you the rest of the nightmare. The point is that <em>this</em> time, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝHarrison didn‚Äôt come in bubblingly eager to say where she had been and what she had been doing‚ÅÝ‚Äîand that <em>next</em> time the alibi will hold water‚ÅÝ‚Äîand then Harrison will start saying that you can‚Äôt trust women, and will very likely be perfectly justified.</p>
			<p>Bungie‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI <em>see</em> how these things happen, but how does one insure against them? What security have we that we‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou and I, with all our talk of freedom and frankness‚ÅÝ‚Äîshall not come to this?</p>
			<p>Love makes no difference. Harrison would cheerfully die for his wife‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I can‚Äôt imagine anything more offensive than dying for a person after you‚Äôve been rude to them. It‚Äôs taking a mean advantage. And what‚Äôs the good of it all to him, if he loves her so much that everything she says gets on his nerves? I like Harrison‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI think he‚Äôs worth a hundred of her‚ÅÝ‚Äîand yet, every time there‚Äôs a row, she ingeniously manages somehow to make him appear to be in the wrong. She is completely selfish, but she takes the centre of the stage so convincingly that the whole scene is engineered to give her the limelight for her attitudes.</p>
			<p>This house is becoming a nightmare; I shall have to chuck it, but I must stay on till Easter, because the rent is paid up to the quarter and I can‚Äôt afford to lead a double life and Lathom can‚Äôt manage more than his own share. Hell!</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">I to Hercules</i> comes out next month. I hope old Merritt won‚Äôt be let down over it. He continues to be enthusiastic. Senile decay, I should think. Well, we‚Äôll hope for the best. If my Press is as good as yours I shan‚Äôt complain, my child.</p>
			<footer role="presentation">
				<p>
					<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your envious</span>
					<br/>
					<b epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Jack</b>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
